 
ANDY ANDRES: So let's run through our survey of various hitting metrics,
various measures of offensive performance, by a team,
and look at how they relate to the team runs scored.
Quick reminder, these data are from 1955 to 2013,
and it ended up being 1,428 team seasons,
so N equals 1,428 team seasons included here.
We excluded team season data from shortened seasons because of strikes.
So this is our data set, these team season data,
and we're looking at team batting average
as it relates to team runs scored.
We went through this slide before, and we
saw that 67% here, 0.67, for the coefficient of the termination
R squared, indicates that 67% of the variation in team runs
scored is explained by batting average.
But can we do better than just batting average?
Batting average isn't bad, but the problem with batting average
is it doesn't really have any indication about power slugging.
It treats home runs equally to singles, and we
know those are the same kinds of hits in the game,
so we probably can improve on batting average.
What if we just looked at home runs straight up?
Here's home runs.
This is cumulative home run data, just the sum total
of home runs hit by the team versus the team runs
scored, and 55% is our coefficient of determination, our R squared, 0.55.
That correlation isn't as strong.
The coefficient of determination isn't as strong as batting average,
but there still is one.
A real important piece here that is not describing in these data of home runs,
is the ability to get on base and not make outs.
So the sabermatrician knows that home runs by itself is probably
not the best metric to get at team runs scored, to explain team runs scored.
And again, team runs scored is our sort of standard
here that we want to get closer to.
So home runs isn't that good.
Home runs isn't that good.
Neither was batting average.
They're fine.
These coefficients of determinations for each of them was OK,
but we can probably do better by somehow combining this idea of getting on base,
not making outs, and power.
The ability to move runners along with hits that you go farther on the bases
than just a normal single or a walk.
So that's the idea of some of the advanced metrics.
Let's move on, and we'll look at hits.
Hits, again, is a straight counting stat.
This stat here just counts the number of hits a team has in a given season
and relates it to team runs scored.
The R squared is 67%, very similar to batting average.
The R squared of batting average is 67%, a little bit better
than just the straight count of hits.
So again, we're still on a hunt for improving
our R squared to try to get a higher number here.
So let's try a few other statistics, hitting metrics, on base percentage.
Here's the formula for on base percentage.
It's hits plus walks plus getting hit by pitch
as a batter divided by at bats plus walks plus hit
by pitch plus sacrifice flies.
This is the formula for on base percentage,
and we calculated on base percentage for all teams in that data
set from 1955 to 2013.
So here's on base percentage, and it ranges from 270 up to 370-ish,
and that's a pretty wide range.
But remember, we have different run scoring environments
included in this data set.
Very low run scoring environments of the mid to late '60s and then higher
run scoring environments of the late '90s, early 2000s.
So that explains some of the variation in the on base percentage.
Now, what we care about though is the R squared,
the coefficient of determination.
So now, we're up to 78%.
78% of the variation in team runs scored could
be explained by on base percentage.
That's better than just counting hits, counting home runs, or batting average.
Let's keep marching along on our survey of other metrics.
Let's look at slugging.
What is slugging?
Slugging is total bases divided by at bats.
Here's how we think of total bases.
Slugging is you add up the singles, you multiply doubles by two, triples
by three, and home runs by four, and that sum is what's called total bases,
then you divide it by at bats.
This is an older metric that was reported for many years, many decades,
as an indication of power.
You can see how home runs are weighted four times the value of a single
in terms of the summation of the calculation of slugging.
So we calculate slugging for all team seasons in our sample of 1955 to 2013,
and we can see that the coefficient of determination is now 82%.
We're getting better with using slugging.
So slugging by itself is better than batting average, better than home runs,
better than hits, and in the same ballpark as on base percentage.
They measure two different things.
On base percentage is the ability to get on base and not make outs.
Slugging is the ability to say move runners along
with hits that advance base runners and batters around the bases more quickly.
So let's look at a few more hitting metrics
that might be related to team runs scored.
Here's another one, OPS.
 
OPS is simply defined as on base percentage,
here's OPS, on base percentage plus slugging.
It's a simple addition of two terms.
Now, these two terms scale differently, and they have different denominators,
and they do represent two different parts of the important measures
of offense in the game, getting on base, not
making outs, advancing runners with more powerful hits.
It could be argued that adding together might be better
than each of these individually.
Turns out, it is.
Turns out that the R squared goes up when you add them together.
And if you just sort of visually inspect the scatter plot here of these two
variables, you can see it's tighter around the line of best fit.
So this idea of the R squared going up makes sense because of the tighter fit.
So OPS, the way we would describe this is
that 89% of the variation in team runs scored
can be described by on base plus slugging percentage, OPS.
So we're getting closer and closer to one, and closer and closer
to describing team runs scored much more completely.
Let's look at one more variable.
This is runs created.
Runs created is hits and walks multiplied by total bases.
Hits and walks looks a lot like on base percentage and total bases
looks a lot like slugging, and it's divided
by at bats plus walks, which looks a lot like plate appearances.
This is very similar to on base percentage times slugging percentage.
Not exact, but close.
Look what happens to our coefficient of determination.
It goes up.
So now we're getting to 92.4% of the variation in team runs scored.
The variation in team runs scored can be explained
by multiplying our on base percentage and slugging percentage.
So that's slightly better than OPS.
The runs created, this formula here, is a simple formula created by Bill James,
and subsequent to his publication of this formula,
he's modified runs created to make it more complex,
including things like stolen bases and caught stealing
and other variables of offensive performance,
and he's getting a more and more better representation of team runs scored.
But again, this is a pretty simple formula,
and it does really well compared to a lot of other metrics anyway,
really well to describing the variation of team runs scored
of variable of interest.
 