 
ANDY ANDRES: Recall from an earlier session
that we divided statistics into actual numbers, measures of something.
And then the field of study of statistics.
And in the field of study of statistics, we
can divide that field into two main areas.
Descriptive statistics.
Descriptive statistics and inferential statistics.
This segment will be about descriptive statistics.
Some describe descriptive statistics with the acronym C-O-P-S, COPS.
And COPS stands for the collection, organization, presentation,
and summarization of data.
 
So when you're performing descriptive statistics,
you collect, organize, present, and especially, summarize data.
In summarizing data, there are three things we do to the data set.
We look for measures of the middle.
Measures of the middle.
This is also called central tendency.
Measures of central tendency.
And we'll define what those are.
That's one thing we do when we summarize data.
The other thing we do with data sets is describe the spread.
 
How the data is spread out.
And finally, we look at the shape of the data.
And we'll describe what this is.
This has to do with distributions.
The shape of the data.
How the data's distributed, how it's spread,
and the central tendency of the data.
So let's create a small little data set to use as an example
to better understand some descriptive statistics.
Here is a simple query looking up the data of David Ortiz.
Now right here is the playerid for David Ortiz.
And just to give you a hint on how the player IDs in the Lahman database
are stored, the first five letters generally represent the last name,
and then there's two letters for the first name.
And then there's a counter based on duplicates of the first seven letters.
That's the typical setup of the player ID.
So I ran this little query, and this represents David Ortiz's player season
statistics since he first was a rookie in 1997, all the way through 2013.
And the data set we're going to look at is his list of home runs.
Now here's the home run, here's the home run column.
Remember this field here describes the home runs
that David Ortiz hits every season.
And here's the list.
The most he's ever hit was 54, and he did that in 2006.
But you can see, this is, this will be the small data set that we use.
So here's the list of home runs just in chronological order.
So we want to try to establish descriptive statistics
on this small little data set.
So for measures of central tendency, we're
going to look at mean, median, and mode.
And there are plenty of others, but those
are the basics when you take your statistics class, your intro statistics
class, you'll learn all the other measures of central tendency.
The three measures of central tendency that we're
going to look at on this small data set are
mean, which is just the average of the data set, mean, median, and mode.
So we're going to define these quickly on this data set.
So here again is our sample data set of the home
runs David Ortiz has hit every season during his major league career.
Let's get a few notations down, N, when we talk N,
N is the number of data points in our sample set.
Number of data points in our sample set.
 
So the number of data points if you count them, there are 17.
So in this case, our data set, we have N of 17.
Another notation you'll see when you talk about descriptive statistics
is the sigma sign.
And specifically in any sample, sigma X is the sum
of all the data points in the sample set.
So sum of all data points.
 
In this case, if you add them up, maybe you want to, or just trust me.
Over that time span, David Ortiz had 431 home runs.
So at the end of 2013, he had 431 home runs over the 17 year career
that he had.
And then we're going to define what the mean is, what the average is,
and the notation we use is an X with a bar over it.
And so that's mean or average.
And that's defined as the sum of all data points, sigma X, divided by N,
the number of data points.
And intuitively, a lot of us have done averages before.
You take all the numbers in the data set, you sum them,
you get the sum total, and you divide it by the number in the sample.
So in this case, it's 431 divided by 17.
That turns out to be 25.35.
So what that says, is David Ortiz, the average number of home
runs he's hit every year he's played major league baseball is 25.35.
25.35 home runs per year on average.
That's the mean.
So the next descriptive statistic we want to cover is median.
This is another measure of central tendency median.
And to get median, to really understand median,
you need to rank order your sample data.
Your data set.
So what I've done is convert this chronological series here
of home runs every year for David Ortiz, and I've changed it.
I've ranked ordered it from the lowest here, this is the lowest,
to the highest.
So when we rank order, we're able to better appreciate
the complete range of data.
And we'll talk about that when we talk about the next set
of descriptive statistics.
But what the median represents is the middle.
The middle of the sample data set.
And that's why you want to rank order them.
There are 17 here, and the middle point is this one here.
So the median is 28.
Median.
Now that's simple, because we have an odd number
of N. N equals 17, that's an odd number, and that
means eight points are on one side of the median.
These eight points here are on one side of the median, these eight points
here on the other side of the median, so this is obviously the middle.
Eight on each side.
But what if the case was N was only 16?
So just let's do a theoretical experiment,
and say N was-- I'm going to erase everything here, N now is 16.
So N is 16.
 
So what if we had only an N of 16?
N now equals 16.
And theoretically, let's say David Ortiz never
had this season where he hit zero home runs.
And he only had these 16 data points to go from.
What would the median be?
Because it would sort of fit right here.
It would fit right here.
What you do when you calculate the median of an even data set,
a data set with an even n, is you take the two middle numbers, here 28 and 29,
and you just take the average of them.
So in this case, the median would be 28.5.
28.5 is the average of those two middle numbers.
So that's how you calculate the median in an even data set.
Remember, this is theoretical, David Ortiz, of course, played 17 years.
Now finally, mode.
What is the mode?
And again, this rank order data set is going to help us.
So what is the mode?
Another measure of central tendency.
Well the mode is the most common number in the data set.
Now if we look across all 17 data points here,
there's only one that's duplicated.
David Ortiz twice has hit 23 home runs in a season.
So this is-- there are two data points with 23, so that would be the mode.
The mode would be 23.
Mode equals 23 in this simple data set.
But if we had a different data set, the mode
would just be the most common data point.
 