 
ANDY ANDRES: Continuing our look at descriptive statistics,
I wanted to cover, now, measures of spread or measures
of variability of a data set.
We want to cover a few key ones here.
One is called range, the range of data in a data set.
Then another version of this, the interquartile range,
is important for different kinds of distributions of data.
Then percentiles.
Three other measures of spread or variability
which are important in statistics are average absolute deviation,
variance and standard deviation, and finally, coefficient of variation.
Let's take a few minutes and better understand
these various measures of spread of a data set.
So remember our sample data set.
David Ortiz's yearly home run totals.
So N equals 17, that's our number of data points in our data set.
N equals 17, there are 17 years of home runs for David Ortiz in our data set.
Now the range, the range is just defined as the largest
number minus the smallest.
Largest minus smallest, and we're going to use LMS again
when we talk about interquartile range.
Now here's the largest.
Largest is 54.
The smallest is zero, so our range equals 54 minus 0, which is 54.
So this is one measure of spread or variability.
So range is useful as far as it goes.
It captures the range from the largest to the smallest.
When we think of interquartile range, it's
sometime described along with what's called the five numbers set.
And here's the five numbers set.
S, Q1, Q2, Q3, and L. We already defined S and L.
S is the smallest number in the data set and L is the largest.
We already know Q2 as well.
Q2 is always the median of a data set.
Last time we went through this, the median would be the middle there.
N equals 17 again.
Since it's odd, we have to balance each side so that they're equal,
and that would mean 8 data points on each side of the median.
Well, there's the median.
Here's the median.
We also know the median is Q2.
 
Now, the interquartile range, the interquartile range sometimes referred
to as IQR, is Q3 minus Q1.
What's Q3?
Well, the way we do Q3 is we go on the side above Q2,
and we start getting the median in that data set.
So there's 8 points here, 8 points here above Q2 or the median.
When we find the median of that subset of the data, that's Q3.
N equals 8, there's 4 data points here and here, so Q3 will fit right in here,
and we have to take the average of these two numbers.
So Q3 is the average of these two numbers, and that's 33.5.
33.5.
Do the same thing for the numbers on the lower side of the median to get Q1,
so we take these 8 points here.
There's 4 on this side, 4 here.
So we know Q1 is going to sit here.
Q1 will be the average of these two numbers, so Q1 equals 14.
So we have a five number set.
0, 14, 28, 33.5, and 54.
This five number set helps describe both the range, the absolute range
from top to bottom, and the interquartile range.
It tells us the median, Q1, Q3-- here's Q1, here's Q3.
The interquartile range is the difference between Q3 and Q1,
so this means it's going to be equal 33.5 minus 14,
which is going to equal 19.5.
Let's move on to the next one, percentiles.
Think of percentiles, think of the full range of the data set,
from smallest being 0% to the largest being 100%.
And if you wanted a percentile-- let's say, for example, the 90th percentile.
You might want this in baseball data.
You might want to know a measure of some ability
and you want to know the 90th percentile where
you're talking about only players above that 90%, the very
special elite players.
So 90th percentile might be a statistic that you
want to understand better, the measure of spread or variability
around any given data set.
Let's use this as an example, 90%.
The 90th percentile of this data set is calculated this way.
What you do is take the 90th percentile and you convert that to a decimal,
so now you've got 0.9, 0.9 as 90th percentile.
You multiply it by N. So you want the N-th percentile multiplied
by N, the number of samples in your data set.
So 0.9 times 17 turns out to be 15.3.
We round this up to 16, any time it's a decimal, we round it up.
So we round it up to 16.
So we count 16 points in our data set.
The 16th point is this one here.
 
So the 90th percentile in our data set is 47.
That's the 90th percentile.
 
And of course, you can calculate other percentiles than just the 90th.
Maybe the 37.5 percentile or the 66.7 percentile.
It's done the same way, converting it to a decimal,
multiplying by the number of samples in your data set, rounding up the decimal,
and finding that actual data point in a rank ordered list.